.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" rnano.1 is copyright 2005 by
.\" Thijs Kinkhorst <thijs@kinkhorst.com>;
.\" skeleton based on nano-tiny.1 by Jordi Mallach <jordi@debian.org>.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation, see the latest version of the GNU General
.\" Public License for copying conditions. There is NO warranty.
.\"
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH RNANO 1 "November 16, 2005"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.SH NAME
rnano \- Restricted mode for Nano's ANOther editor, an enhanced free Pico Clone
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rnano
.RI [options]\ [+LINE] " file"
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B rnano
command.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invoke bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
\fBnano\fP is a small, free and friendly editor which aims to replace
Pico, the default editor included in the non-free Pine package. Rather
than just copying Pico's look and feel,
.B nano
also implements some missing (or disabled by default) features in Pico,
such as "search and replace" and "goto line number".
.br
.B rnano
is a restricted version of \fBnano\fP, which only edits specific files and doesn't
allow the user access to the filesystem or a command shell.
.PP
In restricted mode, \fBnano\fP will \fInot\fP:
.IP \[bu] 2
read or write to any file not specified on the command line;
.IP \[bu]
read any \fInanorc\fP files;
.IP \[bu]
allow suspending;
.IP \[bu]
allow a file to be appended to, prepended to, or saved under a
different name;
.IP \[bu]
use backup files and spell checking.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-V (\-\-version)
Show the current version number and author.
.TP
.B \-h (\-\-help)
Display a summary of command line options.
.TP
See the \fBnano\fP(1) manpage for the complete documentation of nano.
.SH BUGS
Please send any comments or bug reports to
.B nano@nano-editor.org.
.br
The nano mailing list is available from
.B nano-devel@lists.sourceforge.net.
To subscribe, email to nano-devel-request@lists.sourceforge.net with a
subject of "subscribe".
.SH HOMEPAGE
http://www.nano-editor.org/
.SH AUTHOR
Chris Allegretta <chrisa@asty.org>, et al (see AUTHORS for details).
This manual page was originally written by Thijs Kinkhorst
<thijs@kinkhorst.com>, for the Debian system (but may be
used by others).
